## Getting Started

> 📇 **Scenario**
>
> Smoke wafts from Herb's soldering iron as he looks up when you approach.
> Cleaning the iron's tip, he notes:
> "Somebody once said that one of the most dangerous things in the world is a programmer with a soldering iron." [^1],[^2]
> About this time, you hear Archie rumbling in the distance.
> A short time later, he enters Herb's lab and declares,
> "We need a way to quickly perform math."
> 
> You ask the obvious question, "What kind of math?"
>
> Archie explains, "We know that H.Awk Aye took samples a few weeks ago.
> We don't know how many others he's taken."
> He thinks for a moment, "We need to do a little multiplication to determine how many samples are in a case, and addition to add the amounts in several cases.
> If the number of samples is less than what we expect, we need to be able to subtract the expected from the actual to calculate how many samples have been taken."
> 
> You hesitatingly suggest, "You want a calculator?"
> 
> Archie beamingly smiles, "Say! That's a great name for it!"
> 
> Herb jumps in, "Yes, we'll do it."

[^1]: "The three most dangerous things in the world are a programmer with a soldering iron, a hardware engineer with a software patch, and a user with an idea." -- Rick Cook, *The Wizardry Consulted*, 1995.

[^2]: The notion of being wary of programmers wielding screwdrivers or soldering irons long pre-dated this quote, as there are apocryphal tales of people who found it easier to modify the hardware to suit the software rather than the other way around.


### Configuring the Project

#### From VS Code

- [ ] Start your IDE.
- [ ] Launch the PlatformIO plugin.
- [ ] Depending on your particular IDE and plugin version, look for a button to "Pick a Folder", "Open Project", or something similar.
- [ ] Click on that button and navigate to the CalculatorLab project.
- [ ] Build the project.
  - There are many parts of MBED&nbsp;OS that generate compiler warnings.
    By building the project now, before you've written any of your own code, you're assured that any compiler warnings that you see in the future will be warnings about *your* code.

#### From the Command Line

- [ ] Use the `cd` command to navigate to the CalculatorLab directory
- [ ] Build the project using the command
  ```shell
  pio run
  ```
  - There are many parts of MBED&nbsp;OS that generate compiler warnings.
    By building the project now, before you've written any of your own code, you're assured that any compiler warnings that you see in the future will be warnings about *your* code.


### Modes of Operation

The mode of operation is determined by the positions of the switches when the Cow&nbsp;Pi is powered-up or reset.


#### Test Digital Logic Design

- Both switches in the *left* position.

In this mode, seven-segment display will repeatedly cycle through the ten decimal numerals.
One of the digits on the seven-segment display will have its glyphs generated by a simulated ROM in the starter code.
Another digit will have its glyphs generated by code that you will write to simulate a PLA.


#### Test Number Builder

- **Right** switch in the *left* position, and the **left** switch in the *right* position.

In this mode, the display module will show the number generated by a sequence of inputs, as well as an overflow flag.
Your code will turn the inputs into numbers.


#### Four-Function Calculator

- **Right** switch in the *right* position.

We have included the code for a simple four-function calculator that makes use of the simulated PLA and of the number builder that you will write.
After you have correctly implemented those, you will not need to implement any further code for the calculator.


### Descriptions of CalculatorLab Files

#### seven_segment_pla.h & seven_segment_pla.c

Do not edit *seven_segment_pla.h*.

The *seven_segment_pla.c* file contains seven functions for you to complete.
Each of these functions will use the four bits used to represent a decimal numeral to form a boolean expression that specifies the "on" and "off" states of a segment in a seven-segment display.

#### seven_segment_rom.h & seven_segment_rom.c

Do not edit *seven_segment_rom.h* or *seven_segment_rom.c*.

These files contain a reference glyph generator for the seven-segment display.

#### number_builder.h & number_builder.c

Do not edit *number_builder.h*.

The *number_builder.c* file contains a function, `build_number()`, that will have the logic to "build" a number one digit at a time, like in a calculator.
The file also contains helper functions that will address specific parts of building a number. Right now these functions are only stubs.

#### calculator.h & calculator.c

Do not edit *calculator.h* or *calculator.c*.

These files contain the code for the four-function calculator that is a client to your code in *seven_segment_pla.c* and *number_builder.c*.

#### display.h & display.cpp

Do not edit *display.h* or *display.cpp*.

These files contain code to drive the Cow Pi's display.

#### calculatorlab.c

Do not edit *control_panel.c*.

This file contains the driver code for the assignment.


---

|                 |      [⬆️](../README.md)      |          [➡️](02-seven-segment.md)           |
|:---------------:|:----------------------------:|:--------------------------------------------:|
|                 | [Front Matter](../README.md) | [Seven Segment Display](02-seven-segment.md) |
